docs: small kep for DRA (#853)
kubernetes-sigs/jobset: keps/762-ResourceClaimTemplate/README.md

* Allow optional targeting of specific containers within the Pod to receive access to the shared ResourceClaim.
* Manage the lifecycle of the Job-scoped ResourceClaims, ensuring they are
created when the Job starts and deleted when the Job completes or is deleted.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

* Modifying the core Kubernetes Job/ PodSpec API.
* Supporting retroactive application of new or modified `resourceClaimTemplates` to already running Jobs.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

Introduce a new field `resourceClaimTemplates` within the `JobSet.spec`. This
field will be a list of `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects, similar to how they are defined
within a Pod's spec, but at the JobSet level.

### Design Details

> #### API Changes

Reviewer: I like the example but I’d also like to see the API you are proposing.

  name: shared-resource-jobset
spec:
  replicatedJobs:
    - name: worker-group
      replicas: 3
      template: # This is the JobTemplateSpec
        spec: # This is the JobSpec
          parallelism: 1 # JobSpec fields
          completions: 1 # JobSpec fields
          template: # This is the PodTemplateSpec
            spec: # This is the PodSpec
              containers:
                - name: worker
                  image: your-training-image:latest
                  command: ["python", "train.py"]
                  resources:
                    requests:
                      cpu: "2"
                      memory: "4Gi"
                  resourceClaims: # Pod-level DRA
                    - name: gpu-claim
                      source:
                        resourceClaimTemplateName: pod-gpu-template
                - name: helper
                  image: helper-image:latest
                  command: ["sleep", "infinity"]
              restartPolicy: OnFailure
              # Example Pod-level ResourceClaimTemplate (for comparison)
              # resourceClaimTemplates:
              # - metadata:
              #     name: pod-gpu-template
              #   spec:

>               #     resourceClassName: nvidia-gpu

Reviewer 2: This comment should be *before* the entire `JobSet`, as a separate top-level resource. Also, this is the older API, what you want instead is:

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  name: gpu
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: gpu
      deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
```

I don't think you need to comment it out, it's useful to show the per-pod and the per-job level RCTs.

For the per-job RCT, it would look something like:

```yaml
- metadata:
    name: imex-channel
  spec:
    devices:
      requests:
      - name: imex-channel
        deviceClassName: imex.nvidia.com
```

Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### IMEX User Story

As an engineer running simulations that require an IMEX channel within an NVLink domain,
I want the JobSet to create a ResourceClaim representing that channel, and have all Pods
within the Job configured to use that channel.

#### TPU Slice User Story

As a researcher running distributed training on a multi-node TPU slice, I want
to define a JobSet that automatically provisions a TPU slice ResourceClaim
shared by all Pods of a Job, ensuring my training job has the necessary multi-node resources.

#### Kubeflow User Story

As a Kubeflow user leveraging JobSet through common interfaces like the [Training Operator](https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer?tab=readme-ov-file#kubeflow-training-operator-v1),
I should be able to request per-job shared resources in addition to my per-pod resources in a declarative manner,
so that the platform can manage resources for complex multi-node, multi-pod jobs without manual intervention.

> ### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

Reviewer: A few things I'll ask you to answer here.

1) How does your proposal handle that DRA has various api levels between 1.30-1.32?

2) How do you plan to test this functionality? 
  a) Is there any way to test this cross node functionality with dra-example-driver?

Reviewer: If we eventually get this work into batch/Job in upstream, what does that mean about this feature? Can you see a world where this exists and Job ResourceClaimTemplates exist together?

Author: @johnbelamaric please keep me honest/ on track here but here's my thoughts:

> How does your proposal handle that DRA has various api levels between 1.30-1.32?

One advantage of use adding the RCT as a top level JobSet change is that we can "decouple" from the core API changes. That said, we should encourage that people use the beta/ latest DRA API.

> How do you plan to test this functionality?
a) Is there any way to test this cross node functionality with dra-example-driver?

AFAICT, the `dra-example-driver` doesn't have cross node support yet; Do you have any suggestions beyond manual testing?

>  Can you see a world where this exists and Job ResourceClaimTemplates exist together?

I'll defer to folks that have more insight into the future of DRA/ JobSet but my 2c are that having a semantic for making per JobSet device claims will continue to be useful.

Reviewer: > One advantage of use adding the RCT as a top level JobSet change is that we can "decouple" from the core API changes. That said, we should encourage that people use the beta/ latest DRA API.

At some point, I imagine the RCT will create ResourceClaims via DRA, right? So in this case, we will eventually create DRA APIs where the API level for these differns from Kubernetes versions.

I'm trying to understand why you will use this feature for 1.30, 1.31 and 1.32 (where DRA is alpha, alpha and beta). JobSet runs on the latest three releases of Kubernetes.

>AFAICT, the dra-example-driver doesn't have cross node support yet; Do you have any suggestions beyond manual testing?

If that is what we have, I guess that is fine. Do you have an environment where you can test this feature and confirm it works before merge?

Reviewer 2: @bg-chun is working on beefing up the example driver to demonstrate various device modeling features (e.g., partitionable). We might though want a separate test driver?

The version is an interesting point. In 1.33 we have v1beta2, which we expect will be the shape of the API that we GA. I don't think we should support the alpha versions, frankly. Is it a problem for this particular feature to only work on 1.32+? Since that's when it went to beta? If we do that, then we can shape JobSet's embedded template based on the v1beta2 RCT, but actually generate v1beta1 RCTs (they can roundtrip, so this is do-able). That way, it works on 1.32 and 1.33. Eventually (when 1.34 is the oldest release), we change the RCTs we create to v1 not v1beta1.

Alternatively, we reference a separate RCT by name in the JobSet spec, and so the shape of that API no longer includes the template for the RCT, but pretty much just the "containers" bit that we have to layer in.

Reviewer 3: I’m currently working on adding a reference implementation for the Partitionable Device API to the example DRA driver. This API covers two scenarios: NVIDIA MIG and Multi-Host TPU Scheduling. However, since the current example DRA driver mimics NVIDIA GPUs, I’ll start by implementing a simple version of the MIG feature.

After adding this MIG-like implementation of the Partitionable Device API, I think we should have a discussion about the overall direction of the example device driver project. I believe the example DRA driver should ultimately demonstrate various device modeling scenarios.

Reviewer: Thank you @johnbelamaric!

That is the main items I am thinking through on this.

How do we handle different version for DRA?

I am okay with supporting 1.32+ but we should make it clear.

What happens with 1.30 and 1.31 if this API is used? Will there be a feature gate for JobSet?

Can we discover what kind of API is available in the APIServer and convert?

Author: ( just chiming in here, I reckon the thinking is to go with:

> I am okay with supporting 1.32+ but we should make it clear.

& feature gate it. We can error our if the gate is on but we don't meet the minimum API server requirement?)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

* The containers field within `resourceClaimTemplates` is optional. If omitted,

> the `ResourceClaim` will be made available to all containers in the Pod.

Reviewer 2: Hmm. Probably this should be that it does not add it to any containers. Pod-level claims are valid for NICs, for example. I don't know though of multi-node pod-level claims. But still, I think less magic is better.

considered stable.

If the feature you are introducing has high complexity, consider adding graduation
milestones with these graduation criteria:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### Manual ResourceClaim management

Users could manually create the shared ResourceClaim and then reference it in their
Pod specs. This requires manual cleanup, and doesn't integrate well with the
JobSet's lifecycle management.

### Modifying CoreJob API

We could add a similar feature to the core Kubernetes Job API. However, this has a

> much  barrier to entry, wider impact, and longer development cycle compared to

Reviewer 2: s/much/much higher/

enhancing an out-of-tree controller like JobSet.

### PodSpec Patching

Instead of the `JobSet` controller injecting resourceClaims entries into the Pod

> spec based on `resourceClaimTemplates`, we can consider an alternative approach.

Reviewer 2: `resourceClaimTemplates[].spec.containers`

```yaml
# Pod Template Spec Example
containers:
  - name: worker
    resourceClaims:
      - name: shared-claim-ref # Name for the reference within the container
        source:
          # Uses the name from JobSet's resourceClaimTemplates.metadata.name
          resourceClaimName: imex-channel # Placeholder
```

> 1. Users would define a `resourceClaim`s entry with the containr spec in the `Job`'s

Reviewer 2: s/containr/container/

  - [Manual ResourceClaim management](#manual-resourceclaim-management)
  - [Modifying CoreJob API](#modifying-corejob-api)
  - [PodSpec Patching](#podspec-patching)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

This KEP proposes adding a `resourceClaimTemplates` field to the JobSet CRD

> (specifically within `spec.replicatedJobs[].resourceClaimTemplates`) to allow users to define

Author: I think this thread addresses the comment -- https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/pull/853#discussion_r2035802009

kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  name: gpu
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: gpu
      deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
---
apiVersion: jobset.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: JobSet
metadata:
  name: shared-resource-jobset
spec:
  replicatedJobs:
    - name: worker-group
      replicas: 3
      template: # This is the JobTemplateSpec
        spec: # This is the JobSpec
          parallelism: 1 # JobSpec fields
          completions: 1 # JobSpec fields
          template: # This is the PodTemplateSpec
            spec: # This is the PodSpec
              containers:
                - name: worker
                  image: your-training-image:latest
                  command: ["python", "train.py"]
                  resources:
                    requests:
                      cpu: "2"
                      memory: "4Gi"
                  resourceClaims: # Pod-level DRA
                    - name: gpu-claim
                      source:
                        resourceClaimTemplateName: pod-gpu-template
                - name: helper
                  image: helper-image:latest
                  command: ["sleep", "infinity"]
              restartPolicy: OnFailure

>           resourceClaimTemplates:  # NEW: JobSet-level ResourceClaimTemplates (added inside JobSpec)

Reviewer 4: Why this API is under `replicatedJob[].template.spec.resourceClaimTemplates` ?

Author: Ah good catch! This should be one level higher 😛

            - metadata:
                name: imex-channel
              spec:
                devices:
                  requests:
                  - name: imex-channel
                    deviceClassName: imex.nvidia.com
              containers:
                - worker # Only the 'worker' container gets the 'imex-channel' claim reference
            - metadata:
                name: shared-data
              spec:
                devices:
                  requests:
                  - name: shared-data
                    deviceClassName: shared-data-resource
```

> #### Behavior Changes

Reviewer 4: This is similar to PVC Template for StatefulSet, right?
https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/#volume-claim-templates

Author: I think so but I am not super familiar with PVCs at this point

2. An `ownerReference` is added from the `ResourceClaim` to the `Job`.

3. The controller modifies the Job's Pod spec. For the imex-channel claim,
only the worker container gets a reference. For the shared-data claim, all containers get a reference.

4. `ResourceClaim`s are deleted when the `Job` completes (default policy).

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### IMEX User Story

As an engineer running simulations that require an IMEX channel within an NVLink domain,
I want the JobSet to create a ResourceClaim representing that channel, and have all Pods
within the Job configured to use that channel.

#### TPU Slice User Story

As a researcher running distributed training on a multi-node TPU slice, I want
to define a JobSet that automatically provisions a TPU slice ResourceClaim
shared by all Pods of a Job, ensuring my training job has the necessary multi-node resources.

#### Kubeflow User Story

> As a Kubeflow user leveraging JobSet through common interfaces like the [Training Operator](https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer?tab=readme-ov-file#kubeflow-training-operator-v1),

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As a Kubeflow user leveraging JobSet through common interfaces like the [Kubeflow Trainer](https://www.kubeflow.org/docs/components/trainer/overview/#who-is-this-for),
```

I should be able to request per-job shared resources in addition to my per-pod resources in a declarative manner,
so that the platform can manage resources for complex multi-node, multi-pod jobs without manual intervention.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

* If `spec.replicatedJobs[].template.spec.resourceClaimTemplates[].spec.containers` is omitted, the controller should still create the ResourceClaim for the Job and associate it with the Pod (e.g., by adding it to pod.spec.resourceClaims), but it should not automatically add a reference to it in spec.containers[].resourceClaims for any container.

* Pod-level `resourceClaim`s with the same name as a JobSet-templated

> claim will override the JobSet-level claim for that container, and a warning will be emitted.

Reviewer 4: Can we solve it with webhook validation rather than warning ?

Author: We could! But I'd prefer not to rely on webhooks given the complexity they introduce 🤔 . I can add a small blurb about that.

Reviewer 4: JobSet already maintains Validation Webhook, so we can just add additional check for `resourceClaim`

Author: Added a note about using a validating webhook.

milestones with these graduation criteria:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### Manual ResourceClaim management

Users could manually create the shared ResourceClaim and then reference it in their
Pod specs. This requires manual cleanup, and doesn't integrate well with the
JobSet's lifecycle management.

### Modifying CoreJob API

We could add a similar feature to the core Kubernetes Job API. However, this has a
much higher barrier to entry, wider impact, and longer development cycle compared to

> enhancing an out-of-tree controller like JobSet.

Reviewer 4: What is our strategy here @ahg-g @kannon92 @acpana @tenzen-y @johnbelamaric ?
We have similar features that we want to implement on the Job layer first: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/issues/572.

I am not sure if it is right for the long-term to push more features to the JobSet controller rather than Job controller.

Reviewer: xref: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/lws/issues/444

Reviewer: xref: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/issues/762#issuecomment-2613969432

We did meet and discuss this feature at wg-device-management a few months back. I think there is a lot of interest in this and it is not clear if we put all of this in Job controller.  If we want each replicated job to have a different resourceClaim, then I think it would make sense to have this just in Job API.

If we want multiple replicated jobs to share the same resourceClaim it may make sense to have it at the JobSet leve.

For LWS, @ahg-g mentions that even if there was support for this in StatefulSet it still may be necessary to have this for LWS to help tune the behavior LWS wants.

I also am open to experimenting more in out-of-tree controllers. 

There are downsides to putting this in an out-of-tree controller though. We don't test/verify DRA in any capacity in our CI so we would need some kind of testing to verify that this works with DRA across different releases. We also inherit a potentially unstable API and if upstream adds suport for this feature maybe we have to deprecate.

Reviewer 5: For LWS, we want both the Leader and Worker StatefulSet to share a resource claim. Support at the StatefulSet level only would support the all the workers sharing one, and the leader having a separate resource claim.

Reviewer 6: So my understanding from this discussion is:
* We think that DRA eventually will be added to the in-tree workload controllers.
* We think there are scenarios where it will not be sufficient to only rely on support in the in-tree controllers (like the LWS example), meaning that there needs to be some level of support for DRA out-of-tree.

What is not clear to me, is whether the implementation in JobSet would look different if there we had support in-tree, i.e. are we creating long-term challenges or inconsistencies if this is implemented in JobSet and we later also have support in Job/StatefulSet. Maybe it would be worth thinking about what that would look like?

As for the question around CI and unstable APIs, we are planning to get DRA to GA in the next release. That should make it pretty straightforward to test with DRA, although we need to handle the versioning for a few releases. And with the v1beta2 API that was added in 1.33, we don't expect any significant changes between v1beta2 and v1.
